--- PAGE 1 ---
                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
LABORATORY MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
CE4013/CZ4013/SC4051 Distributed Systems 
 
Free Access: 
Software Project Lab (Location: N4-B1b-11) 
 
 
 
 
Course Project: Design and Implementation of 
A Distributed Banking System 
 
 
 
SESSION 2025/2026 
SEMESTER 2 
COMPUTER ENGINEERING / COMPUTER SCIENCE COURSE 
 
 
COLLEGE OF COMPUTING AND DATA SCIENCE 
NANYANG TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
CE4013/CZ4013/SC4051 Distributed Systems   
Page 1 
Design and Implementation of A Distributed Banking System 
 
 
1. OBJECTIVE 
 
 This project consolidates the basic knowledge about interprocess communication and 
remote invocation. Through this project, the students will gain hands -on experience in 
constructing client and server programs that use UDP as the transport protocol.  
 
 
2. LABORATORY 
 
 Non-scheduled lab, free access: Software Project Lab (N4-B1b-11). 
 
 
3 EQUIPMENT 
 
 PCs with Windows OS. 
 
 
4. INTRODUCTION 
 
This project is to be done in groups of at most three students (the responsibility 
should be clearly divided among group members). The objective of the project is 
to design and implement a distributed banking system. This manual describes the 
desired functions of the system. You should consult the lecture notes and/or the 
textbook while doing the project. You are required to demonstrate working programs 
and to submit a lab report and well-commented source code at the end of the project.  
 
 
5. EXPERIMENT 
  
5.1 Preliminaries 
 
The program you are asked to write for this project uses UDP (not TCP) sockets. In 
addition to the lecture notes, you may also refer to the online notes on socket 
programming in the NTULearn course site. 
 
5.2 System Description 
 
In this project, you are asked to design and implement a distributed banking system 
based on client -server architecture. The information of all bank accounts is stored at 
the server. Each bank account is characterized by the account number (integer), the 
name of the account holder (variable- length string), the password (fixed- length 
string), the type of currency (enumerated type), and the account balance (floating-
point value). The server program implements a set of services on the bank accounts 
for remote access by clients. Meanwhile, the client program provides an interface for 
users to invoke these services. On receiving a request input from the user, the client 
sends the request to the server. The server performs the requested service and 
returns the result to the client. The client then presents the result on the console to 
the user. The client-server communication is carried out using UDP.  
The services to be implemented by the server program and made available to 
the users through the client program include: 
1. A service that allows a user to open a new account by specifying his name, a 
password of his choice, the currency type of the account and the initial account 
balance. The service creates a new account at the server and returns the account 
number as the result.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
CE4013/CZ4013/SC4051 Distributed Systems   
Page 2 
2. A service that allows a user to close an existing account by specifying his name, 
his account number and the password. The service returns a message to 
acknowledge the account closing. In case of incorrect user input (e.g., wrong 
password; the account number specified by the user is not under his name or 
does not exist at the server), a proper error message should be returned.  
3. A service that allow s a user to deposit/withdraw money into/from an account by 
specifying his name, his account number, the password, the currency type and 
amount he would like to deposit/withdraw. On completion of the service, the 
updated balance of the account is returned to the user. In case of incorrect user 
input (e.g., wrong password; there is not enough balance in the account for the 
user to withdraw), a proper error message should be returned. 
4. A service that allows a user to monitor updates made to all the bank accounts at 
the server through callback for a designated time period called monitor interval. 
To register, the client provides the length of monitor interval to the server. After 
registration, the Internet address and the port number of the client are recorded 
by the server. During the monitoring interval, every time an update is made to any 
bank account at the server (e.g., account opening, closing, deposit and withdraw 
as described above), the updated information of the involved account is sent by 
the server to the registered client (s) through callback. After the expiration of the 
monitor interval, the client record is removed from the server which will no longer 
deliver the account updates to the client. For simplicity, you may assume that the 
user that has issued a register request for monitoring is blocked from inputting 
any new request until the monitor interval expires, i.e., the client simply waits for 
the account updates from the server during the monitoring interval. As a result, 
you do not have to use multiple threads at a client. However, your implementation 
should allow multiple clients to monitor updates to the bank accounts 
concurrently.  
In addition to the above services, you are required design and implement two 
more operations on the bank accounts through client- server communication. 
One of them should be idempotent and the other should be non -idempotent. 
Describe your design in the report. 
 
5.3 Requirements and Hints 
 
In this project, you are expected to design request/reply message formats, fully 
implement marshalling/unmarshalling and the fault- tolerance measures by 
yourself. You may use a byte array to store the marshaled data. Do NOT use 
any existing RMI, RPC, CORBA , Java object serialization facilities and 
input/output stream classes in Java. 
You are required to write a server program and a client program using the system 
calls in UDP socket programming. To enable the client to communicate with the 
server, you can assume that the server address and port number are known to the 
client (e.g., the server address and port number may be specified as arguments in the 
command that starts the client). The IP address of the computer can be obtained with 
the “ipconfig” command in Command Prompt. On the other hand, the server does not 
know the client address in advance. The client address is obtained by the server 
when it receives a request from a client. There can be multiple clients running 
concurrently on different computers in the system. For simplicity, you may assume 
that the requests made by the clients are well separated in time so that before 
finishing processing a request, the server will not receive any new request from any 
client. As a result, you do not have to create a new thread at the server to serve each 
request received. 
The client provides an interface that repeatedly asks the user to enter a request and 
sends the request to the server. Each reply or error message returned from the 
server should be printed on the screen. The interface provided by the client should 

--- PAGE 4 ---
CE4013/CZ4013/SC4051 Distributed Systems   
Page 3 
include an option for the user to terminate the client. For simplicity, you may design a 
text-based interface on the console, i.e., a graphical user interface is not necessary.  
The server repeatedly receives requests from the client, performs the services and 
replies to the client. The received requests and the produced replies should be 
printed on the screen. Persistent storage of bank account information on disks is not 
compulsory. The minimum requirement is to maintain the ba nk account information in 
the memory during the execution of the server program. 
Based on the above system description, you are required to design the structures 
for request and reply messages, and describe your design in the report. Note 
that different operations may need different types of arguments and return different 
types of results. All messages transmitted between the server and the clients must be 
in the form of a sequence of bytes. Therefore, you must marshal the integer 
values, floating-point values, enumerated type values, strings etc. before 
transmission and unmarshal them upon receipt. Note that the strings (e.g., the 
name of the account holder ) need to be marshaled because their lengths are not 
fixed and may vary from request to request. You may consider adding the length 
information of the string in the marshaled messages. The following functions in C are 
useful in marshalling and unmarshalling: 
       #include <netinet/in.h> 
       uint32_t htonl(uint32_t hostlong); 
       uint32_t ntohl(uint32_t netlong); 
The htonl() function converts the unsigned integer hostlong from host byte order to 
network byte order. The ntohl() function  converts the unsigned integer netlong from 
network byte order to host byte order. The network byte order, as used in the Internet, 
is Most Significant Byte first, whereas the host byte order depends on the specific 
architecture of the host. 
You are required to implement the system with two different invocation 
semantics: at-least-once and at- most-once. To do so, you will need to implement 
techniques like timeouts, filtering duplicate request messages, and maintaining 
histories. You can consult the textbook and the lecture notes for the details of 
invocation semantics and associated techniques. Which semantics to use c an be 
specified as an argument in the command that starts the client/server. You can 
assign a request identifier to each request for detecting duplicate requests. As part 
of this project, you should simulate the loss of request and reply messages in 
your program, and design experiments to compare the two invocation 
semantics. Show that at -least-once invocation semantics can lead to wrong results 
for non- idempotent operations, while at -most-once invocation semantics work 
correctly for all operations. Describe your experiments and discuss the results in 
the report. 
The basic requirement of this project is to write both the client and server 
programs in either C/C++, Java, or any other language supporting inter-process 
communication. An additional but optional requirement is to implement the 
client and the server in different programming languages – for example, one in 
C/C++ and one in Java. In this case, you may need to take care of different data 
representations in different programming languages.  
You may work on your own laptops and use your laptops for demonstration at 
the end of the project. If you work on the Windows platform of the PCs in 
Software Project Lab, please use port number 2222 only for interprocess 
communication. This is because due to the security measures and firewall 
configurations of the lab computers, messages transmitted between computers at 
other ports may be blocked. 
For the remaining design and implementation details, make your own 
reasonable assumptions and decisions. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
CE4013/CZ4013/SC4051 Distributed Systems   
Page 4 
 
6. REPORT AND DEMONSTRATION 
 
You are required to submit a lab report and well -commented source code at the 
end of the project. The submission deadline is 11:59pm,  April 2, 202 6 
(Thursday). Late submission will not be accepted. 
The source code should be submitted electronically through the assignment 
module on the course website in NTULearn . Please take note of the following 
important notices: (1) the assignment module accepts one file only, so you will need 
to pack all your source programs;  (2) the assignment module does not allow 
resubmission, so please submit the source code only when the final version is ready; 
(3) for each group, only one representative of the group members needs to submit 
the source code (please do NOT submit a copy of the source code from each 
member in the group); (4) in case there is any unexpected problem in the NTULearn 
system, please try submission again after a while. Please avoid submission at the 
last minute to prevent overloading the NTULearn server.  
A lab report, limited to a maximum of 12 pages excluding the cover, is required 
from each group. On the cover of your report, please indicate the names of all 
group members (as on your matriculation cards) and the percentage of work 
each member did in the project. In the report, clearly explain your design and 
implementation strategies.  The report should also be submitted electronically 
through the assignment module on the course website in NTULearn.  
You will be required to demonstrate working programs  where the client s and 
server run on different computers. To demonstrate the callback, besides the server, 
you will need to run two clients on two different computers, among which one client 
performs operations on the bank accounts and the other client monitors the updates. 
The demonstration schedule will be arranged later. 
 
7. OTHER INFORMATION 
 
Important Notice: Please be reminded that PLAGIARISM  (copying part of or 
complete programs) is strictly prohibited. Y ou will get zero mark for the course 
project if you copy  the programs from  others or give your programs to others 
for copy. 
 
The computers in the lab are installed with Java (JDK) and Netbeans. If you do the 
course project with your own computer and plan to show your demonstration 
with the lab computers for assessment, you are advised to install the same 
version of JDK as that installed in the lab to avoid compatibility problems. 
Please do not install any other JDK version on the lab computers.  
 
The opening hours of the lab are: Monday to Thursday: 8:30am to 5:45pm and 
Friday: 8:30am to 5:15pm. Please check with Software Project Lab (N4- B1b-11) for 
time slots available for free access. Your Windows account is your CITS account.  
 

